README.md, before:

# DRAFT: A Wallet Compatibility Guide for Bitcoin Keys

> **Note: This document is still in the very early draft stages. Please focus on filling out the intro sections and formatting the comparison chart with necessary columns before trying to add wallets to it.**

### Purpose of the Guide
While great advances have been made in interoperability and recoverability, developers across the industry continue to build wallets that either:
+ Don't implement BIP standard(s)
+ Implement a BIP standard, but with important differences from other wallets that also implemented it
+ Implement a BIP standard, but one that has not been widely adopted (and perhaps only by them)
+ Don't have clear documentation about their derivation paths, backup and recovery processes

For non-technical users who do not have the knowledge or time to deeply study the code for every piece of software they use, it is often difficult for them to discern what standards any given wallet adheres to, and also to understand what (in)compatibility trade-offs they will be making by choosing this or that wallet for their bitcoin. This failure in understanding can lead to vendor lock-in, accidental address reuse, and unnecessary anxiety about why funds appear to be "lost" after importing keys to a different wallet than the one they were generated in.

The purpose of this guide is to aggregate information about how different wallets implement key generation / seed types and, in the case of hierarchical deterministic (HD) wallets, how they handle derivation paths.

### Scope of the Guide
Since most Bitcoin wallets are now HD wallets, this guide will focus on them.

## Wallet Comparison Charts

For simplicity's sake, list the wallets in alphabetical order and only consider what is implemented in **_the current version of the wallet software_**. However, if it is known that a significant portion of people are still using an outdated version with significant differences, feel free to suggest that it be included as well (listed as a new row under the row for the current version of the wallet). Link directly to their documentation (if they have any) as much as possible.

If a wallet's implementation of the standard has critical differences that may affect its compatibility with other wallets supporting the same standard, please mark this with (^#), which can be further expanded on in 'Notes.'

Wallet | [BIP-39](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0039.mediawiki) | [BIP-44](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0044.mediawiki) | [BIP-45](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0045.mediawiki) | [BIP-47](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0047.mediawiki) | 48 (No BIP) | [BIP-49](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0049.mediawiki) | [ BIP-84](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0084.mediawiki)| Recovery |
------------ | ---------- | ---------- | ---------- | ------------ | ---------- | ---------- | ---------- | ---------- |
[Armory](https://www.bitcoinarmory.com/)| [No](https://btcarmory.com/docs/faq) | No | No |  No  | No | No | No | [Video](https://www.bitcoinarmory.com/tutorials/armory-basics/restore-wallet/)|
[Bread Wallet]()| Yes | [No](https://github.com/voisine/breadwallet-ios/issues/131) | No |  No  | No | No | [Yes](https://apps.apple.com/th/app/breadwallet-bitcoin-wallet/id885251393) |[Page](https://brd.com/support/articles/115000763694)|
   [Name]    | [Yes / No] | [Yes / No] | [Yes / No] |  [Yes / No]  | [Yes / No] | [Yes / No] | [Yes / No] | |
   [Name]    | [Yes / No] | [Yes / No] | [Yes / No] |  [Yes / No]  | [Yes / No] | [Yes / No] | [Yes / No] | |
[Samourai](https://samouraiwallet.com/bips)| Yes | Yes | No |  [Yes](https://github.com/SamouraiDev/BIP47_RPC) | No | Yes | Yes | [Pages](https://support.samourai.io/section/5-samourai-backup)|
<!--Columns are: Wallet Name; BIP-39; BIP-44; BIP-45; BIP-47; 48 (No BIP); BIP-49; BIP-84; Recovery Process-->
   
#### If "Yes" To BIP-39

   Wallet    | Number of Seed Words | [Wordlists](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0039/bip-0039-wordlists.md) | Passphrase? | Recovery Instructions |
------------ | -------------------- | --------- | --------------- | --------- |
Bread Wallet |[12](https://brd.com/support/articles/115009772648)| Unknown| No |[Yes](https://brd.com/support/articles/115000763694)  |
   [Name]    |       [number/s]     |           | [Yes+link / No] |   [link]  |
   [Name]    |       [number/s]     |           | [Yes+link / No] |   [link]  |
   [Name]    |       [number/s]     |           | [Yes+link / No] |   [link]  |
   Samourai  | [12](https://support.samourai.io/article/18-restore-your-samourai-wallet-with-your-secret-words)| Unknown| --- |   [Yes](https://support.samourai.io/category/3-restore-recovery)  |
<!--Columns are: Wallet Name; Number of Seed Words; Wordlists; Passphrase?; Recovery Instructions-->

In the 'Number of Seed Words' column, possible answers include: `8`, `12`, `13`, `18`, and `24`. Keep in mind that `13` does not represent 12 words + passphrase. Some wallets do refer to passphrases as an "extension word" or the 13th / 25th word, but this is not really accurate. Please indicate the option to add a passphrase in the 'Passphrase?' column.

### Notes

1. 

### Explainer: Wallet Types
First, an introduction to the various wallet types:

+ [**Paper wallets**](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Paper_wallet) are not actually wallets, but rather private keys and addresses printed out on paper. While the keys and addresses can technically be generated non-deterministically or deterministically, the usability is basically the same or poorer than a non-deterministic software wallet. They have a number of significant drawbacks, including encouraging address reuse, exposing keys to poorly secured networked devices (printer), and not handling change addresses. They should not be confused with [recovery seeds](https://wiki.trezor.io/Recovery_seed).
+ **Non-deterministic wallets** randomly generate all private / public key pairs independent of each other. [*Keypool buffer*](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Key_pool) was added to the Bitcoin-Qt / Bitcoin Core wallet in [October](https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=1414.0) [2010](https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=1528.0), which allowed the wallet to create a collection of unused addresses, rather than generating new addresses one by one upon use. While this feature allowed for less frequent backups than before, the non-determinism still carried the risk of key loss if the pool was exhausted and a new key was generated beyond what was saved in backup.
+ **Deterministic wallets** are essentially any wallet where "[you can backup once... because all future addresses are determined in advance](https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=19137.msg239768#msg239768)," which was a massive improvement in recoverability. There are [two different forms](https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/18102/does-a-wallet-containing-multiple-addresses-have-a-single-private-key):
   + **Sequential deterministic wallets** take a single seed / passphrase and repeatedly increment it in order to generate new keypairs. This meant that the system would only need to store addresses, and then re-generate the private keys when needed.
   + **Hierarchical deterministic wallets** take the single seed and randomly generate a master private / public key pair, which is then used to derive child key pairs that generate addresses. This system allows for the generation of addresses to occur without the master private key, with only the public key.
+ **Multi-signature wallets** require multiple signatures or parties to sign a transaction in order to spend bitcoin. An M-of-N [BIP-11](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0011.mediawiki) address must first be generated in order to receive bitcoin for spending in multi-signature transactions. While the 2-of-2 and 2-of-3 schemes are the most common, the [maximum number of public keys](https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/81223/why-is-20-the-maximum-public-keys-in-a-multisig-transaction) is higher, and this could increase much more in the future [with Schnorr signatures](https://twitter.com/J9Roem/status/991098233828139008) and [Taproot](https://bitcoinops.org/en/newsletters/2019/05/14/).

### Explainer: Derivation Paths
In hierarchical deterministic wallets ([BIP-32](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0032.mediawiki)), a derivation path is a sequence of fields or levels through which a wallet organizes coins in a multi-currency, multi-account, and multi-address system. According to [BIP-44](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0044.mediawiki), this hierarchy consists of five levels, in addition to the master extended private key ('xpriv') represented by `m` (alternatively, derivation paths for the master extended public key or 'xpub' use `M`).

m / purpose' / coin_type' / account' / change / address_index

+ **Purpose:** This field, which was added through [BIP-43](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0043.mediawiki), indicates which standard the derivation path follows. Possibilities include `0` or `44` referring to the default [BIP-44](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0044.mediawiki) P2PKH / '1' legacy addresses, `45` referring to [BIP-45](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0045.mediawiki) P2SH multi-party multi-signature wallets (proposed), `47` referring to [BIP-47](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0047.mediawiki) reusable payment codes (draft), `48` referring to hardware multisignature wallets (no BIP or standard proposal), `49` referring to [BIP-49](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0049.mediawiki) P2WPKH-nested-in-P2SH / '3' SegWit addresses, or `84` referring to [BIP-84](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0084.mediawiki) P2WPKH / 'bc1' native SegWit addresses. Some wallet services are supporting more than one (as in, they can display both legacy and SegWit accounts derived from the same seed).
+ **Coin Type:** This field indicates which cryptocurrency is being used in a multi-currency wallet. All coins, including testnet bitcoin, are assigned [a constant number](https://github.com/satoshilabs/slips/blob/master/slip-0044.md). For example, a derivation path for a Monero (XMR) account would be `m/44'/128'`. *Note that if finalized, BIP-45 would designate this level as the 'Cosigner Index' instead.*
+ **Account:** This field, in a multi-account wallet, indicates the identity or collection of addresses, which allow users to segregate funds for different things (ex. savings, donations). *Note that if finalized, BIP-45 would not include this field. If BIP-47 is finalized, this level would be designated as 'Identity', though it is equivalent to 'Account.'*
+ **Change:** This field, if the constant `0` is present, indicates "external chain" (regular) addresses; if the constant `1`, indicates "internal chain" (change) addresses. *Note that if finalized, BIP-47 would designate this level as space for the notification keys and ephemeral payment codes.*
+ **Address Index:** This field is for indicating the specific address number in a sequence, within an account.

Note how many of the sequential fields start at zero (0), like how the first / ground floor is level zero in the U.K. and Europe. If a user has a wallet that displays them, the derivation path sequence for a **BIP-44** compliant **bitcoin** wallet, in which there is a **second change address** in the **third account**, would look like this: `m/44'/0'/2'/1/1`

The meaning of "public" / unhardened versus hardened derivation, indicated in the fields by apostrophes, is explained [here](https://wiki.trezor.io/Hardened_and_non-hardened_derivation), [here](https://medium.com/@sevcsik/working-with-bitcoin-hd-wallets-ii-deriving-public-keys-c48341629388), and [here](https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/62533/key-derivation-in-hd-wallets-using-the-extended-private-key-vs-hardened-derivati?rq=1).

Commit message:

Added links to other compatibility guides

README.md, after:

# DRAFT: A Wallet Compatibility Guide for Bitcoin Keys

> **Note: This document is still in the very early draft stages. Please focus on filling out the intro sections and formatting the comparison chart with necessary columns before trying to add wallets to it.**

### Purpose of the Guide
While great advances have been made in interoperability and recoverability, developers across the industry continue to build wallets that either:
+ Don't implement BIP standard(s)
+ Implement a BIP standard, but with important differences from other wallets that also implemented it
+ Implement a BIP standard, but one that has not been widely adopted (and perhaps only by them)
+ Don't have clear documentation about their derivation paths, backup and recovery processes

For non-technical users who do not have the knowledge or time to deeply study the code for every piece of software they use, it is often difficult for them to discern what standards any given wallet adheres to, and also to understand what (in)compatibility trade-offs they will be making by choosing this or that wallet for their bitcoin. This failure in understanding can lead to vendor lock-in, accidental address reuse, and unnecessary anxiety about why funds appear to be "lost" after importing keys to a different wallet than the one they were generated in.

The purpose of this guide is to aggregate information about how different wallets implement key generation / seed types and, in the case of hierarchical deterministic (HD) wallets, how they handle derivation paths.

### Scope of the Guide
Since most Bitcoin wallets are now HD wallets, this guide will focus on them.

Collaborating or Complementary Guides:
+ Wallets Recovery http://walletsrecovery.org/
+ SegWit and Replace-By-Fee Compatibility Matrix https://bitcoinops.org/en/compatibility/

## Wallet Comparison Charts

For simplicity's sake, list the wallets in alphabetical order and only consider what is implemented in **_the current version of the wallet software_**. However, if it is known that a significant portion of people are still using an outdated version with significant differences, feel free to suggest that it be included as well (listed as a new row under the row for the current version of the wallet). Link directly to their documentation (if they have any) as much as possible.

If a wallet's implementation of the standard has critical differences that may affect its compatibility with other wallets supporting the same standard, please mark this with (^#), which can be further expanded on in 'Notes.'

Wallet | [BIP-39](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0039.mediawiki) | [BIP-44](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0044.mediawiki) | [BIP-45](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0045.mediawiki) | [BIP-47](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0047.mediawiki) | 48 (No BIP) | [BIP-49](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0049.mediawiki) | [ BIP-84](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0084.mediawiki)| Recovery |
------------ | ---------- | ---------- | ---------- | ------------ | ---------- | ---------- | ---------- | ---------- |
[Armory](https://www.bitcoinarmory.com/)| [No](https://btcarmory.com/docs/faq) | No | No |  No  | No | No | No | [Video](https://www.bitcoinarmory.com/tutorials/armory-basics/restore-wallet/)|
[Bread Wallet]()| Yes | [No](https://github.com/voisine/breadwallet-ios/issues/131) | No |  No  | No | No | [Yes](https://apps.apple.com/th/app/breadwallet-bitcoin-wallet/id885251393) |[Page](https://brd.com/support/articles/115000763694)|
   [Name]    | [Yes / No] | [Yes / No] | [Yes / No] |  [Yes / No]  | [Yes / No] | [Yes / No] | [Yes / No] | |
   [Name]    | [Yes / No] | [Yes / No] | [Yes / No] |  [Yes / No]  | [Yes / No] | [Yes / No] | [Yes / No] | |
[Samourai](https://samouraiwallet.com/bips)| Yes | Yes | No |  [Yes](https://github.com/SamouraiDev/BIP47_RPC) | No | Yes | Yes | [Pages](https://support.samourai.io/section/5-samourai-backup)|
<!--Columns are: Wallet Name; BIP-39; BIP-44; BIP-45; BIP-47; 48 (No BIP); BIP-49; BIP-84; Recovery Process-->
   
#### If "Yes" To BIP-39

   Wallet    | Number of Seed Words | [Wordlists](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0039/bip-0039-wordlists.md) | Passphrase? | Recovery Instructions |
------------ | -------------------- | --------- | --------------- | --------- |
Bread Wallet |[12](https://brd.com/support/articles/115009772648)| Unknown| No |[Yes](https://brd.com/support/articles/115000763694)  |
   [Name]    |       [number/s]     |           | [Yes+link / No] |   [link]  |
   [Name]    |       [number/s]     |           | [Yes+link / No] |   [link]  |
   [Name]    |       [number/s]     |           | [Yes+link / No] |   [link]  |
   Samourai  | [12](https://support.samourai.io/article/18-restore-your-samourai-wallet-with-your-secret-words)| Unknown| --- |   [Yes](https://support.samourai.io/category/3-restore-recovery)  |
<!--Columns are: Wallet Name; Number of Seed Words; Wordlists; Passphrase?; Recovery Instructions-->

In the 'Number of Seed Words' column, possible answers include: `8`, `12`, `13`, `18`, and `24`. Keep in mind that `13` does not represent 12 words + passphrase. Some wallets do refer to passphrases as an "extension word" or the 13th / 25th word, but this is not really accurate. Please indicate the option to add a passphrase in the 'Passphrase?' column.

### Notes

1. 

### Explainer: Wallet Types
First, an introduction to the various wallet types:

+ [**Paper wallets**](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Paper_wallet) are not actually wallets, but rather private keys and addresses printed out on paper. While the keys and addresses can technically be generated non-deterministically or deterministically, the usability is basically the same or poorer than a non-deterministic software wallet. They have a number of significant drawbacks, including encouraging address reuse, exposing keys to poorly secured networked devices (printer), and not handling change addresses. They should not be confused with [recovery seeds](https://wiki.trezor.io/Recovery_seed).
+ **Non-deterministic wallets** randomly generate all private / public key pairs independent of each other. [*Keypool buffer*](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Key_pool) was added to the Bitcoin-Qt / Bitcoin Core wallet in [October](https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=1414.0) [2010](https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=1528.0), which allowed the wallet to create a collection of unused addresses, rather than generating new addresses one by one upon use. While this feature allowed for less frequent backups than before, the non-determinism still carried the risk of key loss if the pool was exhausted and a new key was generated beyond what was saved in backup.
+ **Deterministic wallets** are essentially any wallet where "[you can backup once... because all future addresses are determined in advance](https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=19137.msg239768#msg239768)," which was a massive improvement in recoverability. There are [two different forms](https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/18102/does-a-wallet-containing-multiple-addresses-have-a-single-private-key):
   + **Sequential deterministic wallets** take a single seed / passphrase and repeatedly increment it in order to generate new keypairs. This meant that the system would only need to store addresses, and then re-generate the private keys when needed.
   + **Hierarchical deterministic wallets** take the single seed and randomly generate a master private / public key pair, which is then used to derive child key pairs that generate addresses. This system allows for the generation of addresses to occur without the master private key, with only the public key.
+ **Multi-signature wallets** require multiple signatures or parties to sign a transaction in order to spend bitcoin. An M-of-N [BIP-11](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0011.mediawiki) address must first be generated in order to receive bitcoin for spending in multi-signature transactions. While the 2-of-2 and 2-of-3 schemes are the most common, the [maximum number of public keys](https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/81223/why-is-20-the-maximum-public-keys-in-a-multisig-transaction) is higher, and this could increase much more in the future [with Schnorr signatures](https://twitter.com/J9Roem/status/991098233828139008) and [Taproot](https://bitcoinops.org/en/newsletters/2019/05/14/).

### Explainer: Derivation Paths
In hierarchical deterministic wallets ([BIP-32](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0032.mediawiki)), a derivation path is a sequence of fields or levels through which a wallet organizes coins in a multi-currency, multi-account, and multi-address system. According to [BIP-44](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0044.mediawiki), this hierarchy consists of five levels, in addition to the master extended private key ('xpriv') represented by `m` (alternatively, derivation paths for the master extended public key or 'xpub' use `M`).

m / purpose' / coin_type' / account' / change / address_index

+ **Purpose:** This field, which was added through [BIP-43](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0043.mediawiki), indicates which standard the derivation path follows. Possibilities include `0` or `44` referring to the default [BIP-44](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0044.mediawiki) P2PKH / '1' legacy addresses, `45` referring to [BIP-45](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0045.mediawiki) P2SH multi-party multi-signature wallets (proposed), `47` referring to [BIP-47](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0047.mediawiki) reusable payment codes (draft), `48` referring to hardware multisignature wallets (no BIP or standard proposal), `49` referring to [BIP-49](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0049.mediawiki) P2WPKH-nested-in-P2SH / '3' SegWit addresses, or `84` referring to [BIP-84](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0084.mediawiki) P2WPKH / 'bc1' native SegWit addresses. Some wallet services are supporting more than one (as in, they can display both legacy and SegWit accounts derived from the same seed).
+ **Coin Type:** This field indicates which cryptocurrency is being used in a multi-currency wallet. All coins, including testnet bitcoin, are assigned [a constant number](https://github.com/satoshilabs/slips/blob/master/slip-0044.md). For example, a derivation path for a Monero (XMR) account would be `m/44'/128'`. *Note that if finalized, BIP-45 would designate this level as the 'Cosigner Index' instead.*
+ **Account:** This field, in a multi-account wallet, indicates the identity or collection of addresses, which allow users to segregate funds for different things (ex. savings, donations). *Note that if finalized, BIP-45 would not include this field. If BIP-47 is finalized, this level would be designated as 'Identity', though it is equivalent to 'Account.'*
+ **Change:** This field, if the constant `0` is present, indicates "external chain" (regular) addresses; if the constant `1`, indicates "internal chain" (change) addresses. *Note that if finalized, BIP-47 would designate this level as space for the notification keys and ephemeral payment codes.*
+ **Address Index:** This field is for indicating the specific address number in a sequence, within an account.

Note how many of the sequential fields start at zero (0), like how the first / ground floor is level zero in the U.K. and Europe. If a user has a wallet that displays them, the derivation path sequence for a **BIP-44** compliant **bitcoin** wallet, in which there is a **second change address** in the **third account**, would look like this: `m/44'/0'/2'/1/1`

The meaning of "public" / unhardened versus hardened derivation, indicated in the fields by apostrophes, is explained [here](https://wiki.trezor.io/Hardened_and_non-hardened_derivation), [here](https://medium.com/@sevcsik/working-with-bitcoin-hd-wallets-ii-deriving-public-keys-c48341629388), and [here](https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/62533/key-derivation-in-hd-wallets-using-the-extended-private-key-vs-hardened-derivati?rq=1).
